# Growth Paradox  Everyone wants [[growth]], but what exactly does it mean? Also, I think more important question would be to answer, why do we want growth in the first place? Why don't we want [[decline]]? Even more prominent question would be to answer, why do we relate [[progress]] with growth? Is all progress good? If all progress is good, so all growth is good? Are there any specific forms of growth which we should advocate for and some from which we should refrain from? Is it even possible to do this?  Let's define growth: Process of increase of 'something'. Most [[humans]] have very strong tendency  to [[mimic]] 'successful/influential' people (Read [[Mimetic theory]] by [[Rene Girard]]), and since most of these [[successful]] people want growth ([[accumulation]] of things just for the sake of it, greed in its most basic level, is fundamentally ingrained in our [[genes]]), we blindly start copying others at scale. This basically means, everyone wants growth of similar or adjacent things like [[money]], [[tax collection]], [[power]], [[satisfaction]], [[happiness]] most of the time.   Growth fundamentally represents as [[signal]] (Note: every signal acts as [[countersignal]] in someway). Any form of growth represents as form of signal in our environment as form of [[proof]] for others to see that we are better than other entities present at that level of social structure. This social structure can go on to the levels of humans, [[tribes]], [[companies]], [[groups]], [[nations]] etc. This signal in turns helps us better [[cooperate]]/[[exploit]]/[[decieve]] creating more [[opportunities]] for growth (for our entity within that social structure) and so the cycle goes on.   [[Growth]] happens only at the point of [[resistance]], else the [[inertial]] state of something was supposed to be growing (the inital thing) which it is not (at the needed pace). Basically, more [[access]] you have to something, lesser you [[value]] it. Tougher to get something, the more you value it. Basic, [[scarcity principle]]. Add on top of this, if more entities in same social fabric want the same thing, the scarcity increases further, making growth even more tough. (Competition in Indian competitive exams)  Everyone wants growth of something, which is tough to get since if it were easy to grow that something in the first place, it would have been there by itself without any/much effort needed. To get this growth, there are lot of resistance/[[friction]] points, which if removed or handled properly brings new growth. In essence, inertia or the inability of reality to change itself in our desirable way, causes us to act as to how to grow something in first place.  At [[Meta]] level- why our growth as civilization has reduced, has strong [[causation]] to reduction in number of resitance points faced by [[average human]] in his life today as compared to 100 years ago. Our lives have significantly '[[improved]]' in terms of [[basic necessities]] over span of last 100 years which is what has reduced the number of friction points, thus reducing the eventual growth of whole [[civilization]].   It is quite ironical, that [[prosperity]] brings decline of growth while vice versa is also true where [[tougher]] the conditions (say COVID) which forces us to innovate and out-grow beyond what we know on many frontiers at faster pace.  So in essence, this implies if we want more meaningful growth, we need to face more tougher conditions. Talk about [[paradoxes]]!   We conjecture, it is impossible to think of any growth without resistance. Resistance is the way to grow.  Now, I would like to bring my dear readers attention to progress & why is it so strongly related to growth. I would like to conjecture that progress in its truest sense only relates to meaningful growth.   What do we mean by meaningful growth? All zero sum games are bad, for they eventually lead to competition and consuming someone's pie for sake of our growth. Meaningful growth only happens when we engage in non-zero sum games.   All growth from non-zero sum game is 'net' positive growth, while zero sum game growth tends to make the system more competitve tending towards local maximas instead of global maximas. What Peter Thiel says, Competition is for losers, basically implies that competiton makes you optimize on local maximas while focussing on creating a completely differential game makes you optimize on global maximas, which were previously non-existent for the larger human conciousness, thus expanding the pie further so that more entities can reap benefits from the new enlarged pie.  This fundamentally, increases the chances of survival of the [[collective]], making it a fruitful end in itself.   --- --- --- --- --- ---  Everyone wants [[growth]], but what exactly does it mean, to grow? More important question to answer is, why do we want growth in the first place? Why don't we want [[decline]]? Are there any specific forms of growth that we should advocate for and some which we should avoid?  Let's define growth first: Growth is a process of increase of 'something', whatever this 'something' be. For purpose of this article, this 'something' would refer to only desirable outcomes. Now, why do we seek growth?  Growth fundamentally acts as [[signal]] in our environment to serve as form of [[proof]] making us more attractive than others present at that level of social structure. This social structure can represent humans, [[tribes]], [[companies]], [[groups]], [[nations]] etc. This signal of growth in turns helps us better [[cooperate]]/[[exploit]]/[[decieve]] in our social structures, creating more [[opportunities]] for growth and so the cycle goes on.   Why growth is attractive to most of us? The answer to this lies in our genes. We have very strong tendency  to [[mimic]] 'successful/influential' people (Read [[Mimetic theory]] by [[Rene Girard]]), and since most of these [[successful]] people want growth, we start copying others at scale. This basically means, everyone wants growth of similar or adjacent things like [[money]], [[tax collection]], [[power]], [[satisfaction]], [[happiness]]. (Why do we copy influential people? Because of higher likelihood of survival by copying them)   Next logical question comes is: If everyone is seeking growth, why is it hard to grow?  [[Growth]] comes at the point of [[resistance]]. If there was no resistance, the default state of something was supposed to be growing, which it is not. [[Scarcity principle]] states that easier [[access]] to something, lesser we [[value]] it and tougher to achieve something makes it more desirable. Growth also works on scarcity principle.  On top of this, if more entities in this social fabric want same thing, the scarcity increases further, making growth even more tough, hence valuable, for example- limited seats in competitive exams.  Essentially, this implies if we want meaningful growth, we need to face more tougher conditions. Talk about [[paradoxes]]!   We conjecture, it is impossible to think of any growth without resistance. Resistance is the way to grow.  Now, is there some growth which is more desirable? Absolutely! Any growth from zero sum games leads to competition because size of pie is fixed. Stock market is one example of zero sum games, where if you're making money, someone is also losing too. Thus, zero sum games are generally bad, for they eventually lead to consuming someone's pie for sake of our growth.   Meaningful growth only happens when we engage in non-zero sum games. All growth from non-zero sum game is 'net' positive growth, while zero sum game growth tends to make the system more competitve tending towards local instead of global maximas.   Peter Thiel says, Competition is for losers, he basically implies that competiton makes you optimize on local maximas while focussing on creating a completely differential game makes you optimize on global maximas, which were previously non-existent for the larger human conciousness, thus expanding the pie further so that more entities can reap benefits from new enlarged pie.  This fundamentally, increases the chances of survival of the [[collective]], making it a fruitful end in itself.  #growth